Benefits and Costs of Managing for Complexity and Resilience in the Acadian Forest
========================================================
## NSRC 2013 Pre-proposal - Theme 1
### Robert S. Seymour, Principal Investigator
#### Nathan E. Rutenbeck and David R.J. Carter, Collaborating Investigators

--------------------------------------------------------------------

Project Goals and Supporting Objectives
---------------------------------------

The main goal of this study is to quantify the developmental and growth dynamics of irregular expanding gap harvests implemented within the Acadian Forest Ecosystem Research Program (AFERP) long-term silvicultural study, for the purpose of assessing the benefits and costs to regeneration, recruitment and residual growth that are incurred in managing for post-harvest structural complexity. Our specific objectives are:

1. Use destructive sampling techniques to quantify the overall dynamics of establishment, recruitment and growth for the four  primary regenerating species within harvest gaps. 
2. Using increment cores and dendrochronological techniques, reconstruct growth patterns of retention trees, examining in particular patterns of post-harvest release.
3. 
3. Assess tradeoffs in retention tree and regeneration growth

Rationale
----------

Today global forest resources are being called upon to provide an increasing diversity of values to human society. In addition to a steady supply of traditional timber and non-timber forest products such as building materials, fuelwood, food, and medicine, demands on forests have also come to encompass the services provided by forest ecosystems such as the maintenance of water quality and delivery, protection of biodiversity, and carbon sequestration, as well as less tangible but no less important benefits that include recreational, aesthetic, and spiritual values. And although the demands on forests are not projected to decrease in type or magnitude in the future, anthropogenic impacts on forest ecosystems from pollution to land degradation to global climate change have in many cases seriously impacted the ability of forest systems to reliably provide all of these goods and services. The challenges facing forests combined with the present and future need to manage for such a wide range of goals has led to the development and application of silvicultural systems that are intended to restore and/or protect the dynamic capacity of forest ecosystems to provide for the broad needs of society. While the specific details of these approaches necessarily vary among forest systems, they are essentially rooted in the attempt to bring insights from two separate but related fields of ecological inquiry to application for management. 

The first of these fields of inquiry has been focused on quantifying interactions between spatiotemporal characteristics of natural disturbances (e.g. frequency, intensity, and spatial pattern) and the autecological characteristics of species (e.g. shade tolerance, phenology, seed type) in determining the trajectory of forest compositional and structural development (Connell and Slatyer 1977, Pickett and White 1985). In pursuing this knowledge, much empirical work has been done over the last three decades documenting natural disturbance patterns (e.g. Lorimer and White, Fraver et al. 2007), describing species responses to natural disturbance through successional and growth dynamics studies (Oliver and Larson 1996), identifying the physiological and environmental drivers that functionally determine these dynamics (Bazzaz 1996), and developing and testing predictive models based on this knowledge (e.g. Pacala et al. 1993, Pacala et al. 1996). Broadly speaking, the overall aim has been to move from empirical data to theories regarding the pattern and mechanism behind species resource partitioning across spatio-temporal environmental gradients under different natural disturbance regimes. The impact of this work in applied ecology has been to drive the development of silvicultural systems that attempt to one degree or another to mimic historical patterns of natural disturbance. The Acadian Forest Ecosystem Research Project began in 1994 as one of the first applications and experimental tests of such systems in North America along with other experiments such as Date Creek in the Pacific Northwest.

The second type of ecological work that has more recently come to influence the drive to innovate silvicultural practice is that of complexity science. The focus of this work was originally laregely theoretical, attempting to articulate the broad nature of hierarchical organizational structures, cross-scale linkages, and scale-interactions within ecosystems and the biosphere generally (Allen and Hoekstra 1992), and how these result in desirable emergent properties such as ecosystem resilience (Holling 1973) and adaptability (Levin 1998). Within the last five years, a call has 

Silviculture, as applied forest ecology, ()



Components
----------

1) Regeneration compositional and growth dynamics
2) Retention tree survival and growth dynamics
3) An analysis of matrix growth response
4) Tradeoff analysis (D'Amato paper)